Well, at this time, we have a regular and much-loved feature of the program that will enjoy the inside story.
Please pay close attention to this as it's presented by Brother James Cawthon, one of our Kiliot school instructors.
Life is often compared to music. It has high notes as well as some low notes, isn't that true?
But together they compose a melody that is unique to ourselves.
Where does that melody go?
For faithful worshipers, it goes directly to Johova's heart.
You see, greatly values, not just the accomplishments in our lives, but the journey itself.
So today, we're going to hear from three students in our Gilly Class of 151.
As you listen to the journey, can you hear their song?
Let's get started. I'm sure you'll enjoy meeting our first guest, Joel and Adrian Grimm,
on this edition of the Inside Story.
Adrian, your Theocregul started at a very early age. Can you tell us about that?
Yes, my parents had helped me to know that I wanted to serve Johova early.
And then when I was around 11, there were five young single pioneer sisters that all
moved into my congregation as need graders. So, of course, they were my heroes.
And one of them knew some American Sign Language, and she started conducting Bible studies
and interpreting the meeting for the deaf in the area. And she started teaching me a little
bit too. I was trying to help out. Is that you there at 11 years of age?
That's me and my little brother. I think about that time, yeah.
So, a few years later, when I was a teenager, the sister had to leave the area.
And so, there were the Bible cities there. So, I was trying to help out as much as I could.
But it was challenging then because there were no Sign Language publications yet.
Yeah. So, how did you do that without any publications?
I tried different things. One thing is every Saturday night, you would find me sitting with the
watchtower on one knee and a Sign Language Dictionary on the other knee. And I would just look up every
word. You mean you looked up every word? Yeah, it was the best I could do at the time.
But I got a lot of help too because the deaf were so kind and so generous and helping me.
And so patient. I remember this one time having a Sign Language conversation with a young girl
about my age in the back of the Keenam Hall. And she signed something and I couldn't understand.
So, I asked her to repeat it. She repeated it, but I still wasn't getting it. And we just went back
and forth with her trying every way she could think of to try to get me to understand
until I just had tears going down my face. But we kept at it. And finally, I got it. And I remember
we just hugged because I finally understood. But it was that kind of patience and kindness that I
saw over and over again that just really touched my heart. Yeah. Well, that experience touches our
heart too. Later, you met Joel. And Joel, you were serving at Wal-Kill Bethel at the time. And
things worked out. Adrian, you became a Bethel bride. And then later, you both decided to join
the Sign Language congregation. Now, Adrian already knew ASL Sign Language, right? But Joel,
you had to learn it. So, how was that for you? Well, after learning Sign Language, for one thing,
I will never look at 1st Corinthians 9.22 the same way again. So what does 1st Corinthians 9.22
have to do with learning a language? Well, that's where Paul says that he became all things to people
of all sorts. And that's very true when you're learning a language. Language, it's more than just
collecting vocabulary so that you can communicate with someone. You have to get to know the way that
person thinks. Well, there's no doubt that language can affect the way we think. But can you give us
an example? Sure. Imagine there's two people having a conversation. And you want to get to the
other side. Now, the way I grew up, my culture, is that I need to approach them and excuse myself,
be acknowledged. And then I can move on. But in Sign Language, it's different. If two people are
having a signed conversation, they value their eye contact and the flow of their communication
much more than they value my idea of what's polite. So in Sign Language, you just move on straight
through the conversation, minimal distraction. No, we even in dance and bobbin. No, you just go
straight on through. No waving. No dancing. No bobbin. Just straight through. We should have
applied that to your assignments in class. There's probably some truth to that. So it was difficult
to adapt. But of course, you know, after some time, I got the hang of it. And there were other
adjustments, of course, that you have to make to culture. And I learned a valuable lesson. And
that is that language and culture are intrinsically linked. You can't really have one without the
other. And if you're learning a new language, you have to just adapt. You have to be willing to
to change. And the best thing to do is that if there are no scriptural principles involved,
just adopt the culture and the value of the native language users. And that's what Paul meant.
He said, become all things to people of all sorts. Well, no, Dale Paul is an excellent example in
that regard. And it sounds like you were too. So where did your journey in sign language take
you next? Well, there we were at Bethel. But we really were hoping that we would get a chance
to go to Gilead. But we were advised that it would be a good idea to pioneer together first.
So we left Bethel and we moved to Tennessee and joined a sign language group down there.
And we really did love that group. We sure did. But we met some wonderful brothers and sisters.
And we had some great experiences there in Tennessee. After a few years, the circuit
overseer asked us if we would be willing to move to Texas to support a sign language congregation
there. And so we did. And again, just wonderful times, great brothers and sisters. But we were
only there about a year. And then we got invited back to Wal-Kill Bethel. So we went back to Wal-Kill.
And after a few more years there, the brothers called us one day and asked us if we would be
willing to transfer to the RTO, the remote translation office in Fort Lauderdale, Florida,
where they translate into American sign language. And we were there for five years. This is a picture
of the residence buildings there. It looks very beautiful. So how'd you like that assignment?
I loved it. You remember, I told you that when I first started in sign language, there were no
sign language publications. So then as they started coming out, we had the opportunity to see the
impact that those publications had on so many people's lives. So we already treasured those.
And then to get a chance to kind of get a glimpse behind the scenes and see how much love and
hard work goes into all of those translations. Really was powerful. I loved it.
Mm-hmm. And so what publication are we looking at here?
So this is when we were working on the very first meeting workbook. And this is when we were
working on the sign language version of that one. Really working in the translation department was
such a beautiful way to see Jehovah's love for all people. I'm sure that was excellent. And you
learned good lessons there. Joel, how were you affected by supporting the sign language field?
Well, in many ways, but one way is definitely I learned to be more empathetic. Do you mind if I
share an experience that I wish to be pleased to hear it? Okay. Well, when we were in Tennessee,
we had the privilege of studying with a deaf man named Fred. Now, Fred had been to many churches,
but he was unsatisfied. The local publishers found him in the ministry and he agreed to a Bible
study and Fred loved to learn. He especially loved watching the ASL Bible, the portions of it that
we had available at that time. And he also loved to read the insight volumes. He just had an
insatiable desire for knowledge. He would show up to the meetings and he would ask us questions
about them. So he might come and say, okay, I have two questions about Elijah and Elizabeth.
And we'd think, Oh, he's in the ease now. One day, Fred's wife told us a little story. She said
that she had found him in the bedroom at home sitting on the edge of the bed with his eyes closed
just signing. And she thought something was wrong with him. So she interrupted him and said,
what are you doing? And he told her that he was praying. When I heard that it touched my heart,
it was so beautiful to know that Fred was developing strong faith and that he knew that Jehovah
knows sign language and that he was watching his prayers. It was really something. This is a picture
of Fred on the day that he got baptized. So that's great. Thanks for sharing that. But now I ask you,
was it smooth sailing for Fred after that? No, no, he had many challenges. And one of those
was that he was losing his eyesight gradually. And that was tough for him. Here's a man who
loved to learn. He relied on the sign language videos for spiritual food. And he was going blind.
But he didn't give up. In his 60s, he started to learn braille. And he also had to learn tactile
signing. Now, tactile, could you explain that? Sure. On its most basic level, tactile is
signing into another person's hands so that they can feel the signs and understand what's being
communicated. So that congregation there in Tennessee was just full of self-sacrificing brothers
and sisters who would help him. They would go over to his house and help him prepare for the meetings
by signing the information into his hand so that he could know what was going to be discussed.
And then at the Kingdom Hall during the meetings, we would all pitch in and do tactile
signing for him so that he could keep up and follow along with the meetings. This is a picture of
him there listening to one of the congregation meetings in sign language. You know, that shows a
lot of determination. Not just by Fred, but those in the congregation yourselves as well. Thank you
for that. Well, Fred was determined and he would be there following along with the meetings. And
there might be a question. And so his hand would just shoot up. He wanted to comment. And I would
see that and think, wow, you know, Fred, he's getting it. He's still able to participate. It was
beautiful. Yeah. It is inspiring. We appreciate you sharing that. So no, in conclusion, how do you
think your experiences with the sign language field have helped you to prepare for any future
assignments that may come your way? Well, I feel like it's helped me to learn to be adaptable
and to remember that there's not just one way that things should be done. And also when you're
meeting new people, to really work to try to see the person and not just what you see at first
glance. I think about Fred a lot. He would express frustration at his situation and the challenges he
was facing, but he wouldn't dwell on it. He would very quickly redirect his attention to Jehovah
and how Jehovah was supporting him to get through those challenges and getting to know him helped
me to be more empathetic. But I also saw his humility and the fact that he would not give up
in the face of adversity. So those are some qualities that I want to continue to develop
wherever our journey takes us. Those are great expressions. Thank you both. Thank you for
sharing your story. And by the way, how do you sign? Thank you. Thank you. Our next guest is
Brother Christopher Kits. Before he came to Gilead, he had a very interesting assignment. Please
welcome Chris. Chris, before we talk about your most recent assignment, I'd like to talk about your
early years as a cellist evangelizer. Okay. So this picture, how old were you? I was about four
years old right there. Four years old. And I see even back in the day that you were very
fashion conscious. Thank you. Personally, I think it's the socks with the sandals that brought that
whole outfit together. Yeah. Well, we love the picture and we have, we understand you had to love
for the ministry too. So it tells us a little bit about those early years. Yeah, I always had a joy
in the ministry. I loved it. It was my happy place. My mother would pick me up from school as a kid
and she would take me out with her and the other pioneers. And when I got baptized, I started
auxiliary pioneering. And then as soon as I graduated from high school, I started regular pioneering.
Wow, that's excellent, Chris. Now understand that you also had a theoretical goal from a very young
age. Yeah. I got baptized at 10 and my circuit overseer at the time was Richard Ash. And he got
down on his knee and he said to me, Christopher, when you grow up, you're going to be a circuit overseer
just like me. And his words had a big impact on my little heart. I cherished them and I actually
said, circuit work is a goal. Well, did you meet that goal? I did, but we had a lot of work to do
before we got there. In 2005, I went to the ministerial training school. And then after that, I got a
signed from where I grew up in Long Island, New York to the potato farms of Wisconsin. In a
little town called Annago, I spent three years there. And then I went to the Amish country.
I spent six years in an even smaller town called Nielsville. And then I spent three years in
Wassau, Little City. And that experience was amazing because that's where Jehovah gave me my
training. I learned a lot about myself. Jehovah rubbed off a lot of the rough edges. I learned about
faith. Because in those assignments, I saw Jehovah always provide me work places to live in areas
where sometimes there weren't. And I saw some of my Bible students progress to baptism. And I made
friendships that will less forever. And then in 2018, I was invited into the circuit work, down in
Richmond, Virginia. And that was amazing. I was in the circuit work there for about a year. And it
was about 30 years later that I ran into brother Ash when I was visiting Bethel. And I got to tell him
he was right. And I got to share with him what an impact he had on me as a child. And it really
made me think of the impact that spiritually mature ones can have on young ones, helping them to
set goals that can help them have the best life now. That's an excellent experience. Thank you for
sharing, Chris. So it must have been a great moment for the two of you. But now what's surprising
assignment followed that? Yeah, I was appointed a missionary and I was sent to the East Africa branch.
And I was assigned to circuit work in Darcelam, Tanzania.
So from Virginia to Tanzania, that's quite a job. So how did you feel about that?
I was excited. It was a new adventure. And I didn't know the language. So I'd have to learn Swahili.
I'd have to learn Tanzania and sign language. So I would have an interpreter that would travel
with me from congregation to congregation. So it was a new adventure with me and Jehovah and
new culture. I couldn't wait. There must have been challenges, though. And I think you
related one to me or more that happened soon after you got there. So can you tell us about that
and the effect it had on you? Yeah. Yeah. As soon as I arrived in my assignment in Darcelam,
the COVID-19 pandemic started. And so now I wasn't going to be able to visit the congregations in
person. I would not meet the brothers and sisters face to face. I would have to serve them over
Zoom and over the phone. And about six months into my assignment, I woke up one morning and I had
some pressure on my chest. And I was feeling anxiety because I was alone. I was isolated.
My interpreter lived six hours away. He connected over Zoom and over the phone. And because I showed up
to this little village, the same time the pandemic started. As a foreigner, not knowing the language,
it created some real difficulties between me and some of the villagers. So I was feeling anxiety.
I was feeling alone. There were times I was scared. And for one of the first times in my life,
I was feeling depressed. So I went to Jehovah in prayer and I asked him, did I do something wrong?
Should I go home? Chris, that must have been such a difficult time. How did Jehovah help you?
Jehovah is amazing. He helped me right away see what the solution was. I was giving so much
in the assignment. I needed more time alone with Jehovah. So I started waking up at 5.30 in the
morning. And that's early for me. I liked my sleep. But it was what I needed. I'd make my coffee
and I would go outside and I'd watch the African sun wake up. And as I would watch the sun rise,
I felt peace because I felt like Jehovah was right there with me. And it grounded me. It put
me in the right frame of mind to start my Bible reading. And so before I started, I would say a
prayer to Jehovah and I asked him, Jehovah, talk to me. Let me hear your voice.
And then I started my reading and I would read until I found something that applied to me.
And then I'd stop, meditate and think about it and talk to Jehovah about it. And that really
brought me peace that helped calm me down. And I would be reading and there were times where
it was as if the words would pop off the page. For example, there was one morning where I was in
the book of Lamentations chapter 3. And I was reading in verse 22 and it said there, it is because
of Jehovah's loyal love that we have not come to our finish. And when I read that, I thought,
Jehovah is protecting me in my assignment. And then it said next, for his mercies never end,
they're new each morning. And that was true. I was seeing Jehovah's mercy every morning. His
undeserved kindness was painting me a new sunrise. But verse 24 is what changed my life.
It says, Jehovah is my share. Jehovah was with me. And it says next, that's why I will show a waiting
attitude for him. And it was like Jehovah was saying, Chris, just wait. Don't give up. That brought
me so much peace after I read that scripture. My anxiety went away. The fears that I had were gone.
And as long as I maintained that routine, I didn't feel depressed. I just continued in my assignment.
I found that I had more energy to give the brothers and sisters. I was able to spend more time
shepherding. And on Saturdays, I would spend time with the young ones on Zoom and listen to their
stories and find out what were they doing to help them get through the pandemic. And their answers
built my faith. Chris, I believe you are going to share one of those, a picture of one of those
beautiful African sunrises with us. Is that not true? Yeah. That picture doesn't even do a justice.
Yeah. Well, I can see why that would help you. And you know, we don't typically think of the book
of limitations as a book of comfort. But that's a great scripture to remember. So thanks for sharing
that with us. Now, Chris, as you look back on your journey, you definitely had some high notes
and some low notes. So what lessons have you learned? I learned that love transcends language.
Love has the ability to bypass the mind where words are formed into sentences. And it
can pierce right into the heart where emotions and feelings come from. I needed an interpreter
to translate my words. But love needs no interpretation. Those brothers and sisters could see how
much I loved them as I struggled to learn their language. And I saw how much they loved me
as they patiently worked with me and helped me. And I could see Jehovah's love for them.
It was coming off the pages of the Bible as we read them scriptures. And I could see their love
for Jehovah as they implicitly followed the direction from the governing body. They viewed it as
coming from Jehovah and they followed it even if it came to them at a cost. And I also learned
that you can see Jehovah in creation. And you can hear his voice in your Bible reading. And you
can feel his love coming from the brothers and sisters even over Zoom. And this assignment taught me
that even if you feel lonely or if you're isolated because of a pandemic or you're in prison bonds,
you're never alone.
Chris, thank you for sharing your illuminating story with us. Thank you very much.
So could you hear it, friends? As you saw, each of our students had a unique journey in their
service to Jehovah. Things didn't always go as planned. There were some setbacks and there were
some tears. But in each case, they fully relied on their father, Jehovah. And with his help,
they got past those low notes. And we can too. Because Jehovah greatly values not just our
accomplishments, but the journey itself. Your faithful service is like a pleasing melody in Jehovah's
heart. He cherishes all that you do for his name. And remembering that should give us comfort,
hope, and joy even now. The words of Isaiah 29 echo this thought. Let me read this for us.
This would be Isaiah 3029. It says, but your song will be like the one song in the night when you
prepare for a festival. And your heart will rejoice like one who walk to the flute on his way to
the mountain of Jehovah to the rock of Israel. Some brothers and sisters, don't give up and don't
stop making beautiful music till the next time on the inside story. Well, those comments were
priceless. Thank you very much, brother Kothin and the students soon to be graduates who were
involved with that program. That was delightful.